add draft webxdc realtime post (#1002)
deltachat/deltachat-pages: _posts/2024-11-17-webxdc-realtime.md

[webxdc realtime API](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html) 
which establishes a private P2P network between all users of a chat-shared app. 
Web apps can now ["join" a realtime channel](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html) to instruct their hosting messenger to establish ephemeral data channels
with any other active user of an app. 

<img src="../assets/logos/iroh.svg" style="width:160px; float:right; clear:both; margin-left:.5em; margin-bottom:.2em;" alt="Iroh Logo" />
To implement webxdc realtime channels, 
Delta Chat uses the [Iroh P2P Networking library](https://iroh.computer),
driven by an experienced developer team with which we greatly enjoy collaboration;
big shoutout as they are also behind the multi-device setup of Delta Chat! 💜

The new webxdc realtime API is not only easier to use than the classic 
[WebRTC Browser API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RTCPeerConnection)
but maybe also faster in some situations, according to preliminary measurements. 
Here is a little 30 second video showcasing the
[offline-first and realtime Pixel app](XXX link to latest release) 
between an iPhone and an old Android phone. 

> 

Reviewer: If this is what we want to convey, maybe just say it explicitly?

```suggestion

This blog post describes the new possibilities for webxdc apps - especially if you know JavaScript & HTML and are intrigued by writing a mini-app that runs inside Delta Chat.

```

Alternatively, I think it would be fine to leave things as-is, too, people will probably notice that this is a rather technical post.

The [realtime editor app](https://apps.testrun.org/realtime-editor-v4.0.1.xdc)
is a collaborative editor that can show realtime cursors and changes. 
However, it's also behaving as an offline-first app, similar to the pixel app above. 
If you join the chat-shared realtime editor app later, 
you'll see all changes consistently combined. 

The [realtime editor repository](https://codeberg.org/jagtalon/editor) 
is a fork of the more basic webxdc editor but with realtime capabilities added. 

Again, if you want to improve a tool universally useful for many users, 
please fork and [submit your variant](https://codeberg.org/webxdc/xdcget/src/branch/main/SUBMIT.md). 

## Unix terminal app: realtime with a chat bot 

<video controls style="width:120px; max-width: 100%;float:right;margin-left:5px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline><source src="../assets/blog/2024-11-xdcterm2.mp4" type="video/mp4"></video>
The [xdcterm app demo](https://github.com/link2xt/xdcterm) allows
to start a chat bot on some Unix machine and then open a terminal 
from any Delta Chat profile that has a connection to the bot. 
The [xdcterm repository](https://github.com/link2xt/xdcterm) 

> is a technology *demo* that shows 

Reviewer: At this point when reading, it's not clear yet why it makes a difference that it's just a demo, so I stumbled over it when first reading (further down it's explained "Note that for real usage...").

```suggestion
is a technology demo that shows 
```

how to create a chat bot in Javascript
which will establish a realtime connection to any app
which is in contact with the bot. 
If you add the chat bot to a group then anyone in the group
can get the terminal which is shared (so it's like if "tmux" is built in). 
Note that for real usage the xdcterm example should be modified 
and maybe create a "genesis" group and allow only 
users who are members of the genesis group to join terminals. 

> ## Live Chat: realtime chat in a chat :)

Reviewer 2: maybe this sounds more useful

```suggestion
## Live Chat: realtime thread in a chat
```

Reviewer 3: I like adb's suggestion, it will be also a hint for our dear users from helplines who wanted to have threads so much :)

<video controls style="width:120px; max-width: 100%;float:right;margin-left:5px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline><source src="../assets/blog/2024-11-livechat2.mp4" type="video/mp4"></video>

The [LiveChat app](https://github.com/deltazen/live-chat) 
provides ephemeral chatting with realtime typing-indicators
between anyone in a chat group who starts the live chat. 
Messages are not persisted and history is lost 
when you close the app. 
If all users have closed the app all content is gone. 
There you go. Fully ephemeral, end-to-end encrypted P2P chat at your fingertips :) 

## Get ready, player one!

<img src="../assets/logos/webxdc2.png" style="width:160px; float:left; clear:both; margin-right:3em; margin-bottom:.2em;" alt="Webxdc Logo" />
To get started on webxdc app development, apart from the above app source links,
we recommend the following readings: 

- [Getting started on developing your own app](https://webxdc.org/docs/)

- [Webxdc (Psst!) reclaiming Peer-to-Peer Web
  technology](https://delta.chat/en/2024-02-15-webxdc-m3)

- [Bringing E2E privacy to the Web: 4th security audit 😅](https://delta.chat/en/2023-05-22-webxdc-security)

> 

Reviewer: Maybe suggest to submit it to the store? Or are 4 bullet points too many?

```suggestion

- If you think others might like your app too, please [submit it to our store](https://delta.chat/en/2023-08-11-xstore#how-can-i-submit-my-own-webxdc-app-to-xstore)!

```
or
```suggestion

- To share your app with everyone, [submit it to our store](https://delta.chat/en/2023-08-11-xstore#how-can-i-submit-my-own-webxdc-app-to-xstore)!

```

with the wonderful [Iroh team](https://iroh.computer),
and years of discussions with numerous experts in the decentralization space, 
we are happy to announce that **Delta Chat 1.48 apps on all platforms 
contain state-of-the-art Peer-to-Peer networking support**,
including [hole punching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hole_punching_(networking)),
end-to-end encryption and [gossipping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gossip_protocol). 
Private Peer-to-Peer networks are established 
between users who start a [webxdc app](https://webxdc.org/apps)
that uses the new [joinRealtimeChannel API](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html). 

<video controls style="width:560px; max-width: 100%;"><source src="https://merlinux.eu/webxdc-realtime-148.mp4" type="video/mp4"></video>

In the following sections, we discuss the "Pixel app" and other realtime example apps,
before providing more background on this major project milestone
which was in the making for almost two years. 

## Pixel app: small, offline-first and realtime 

<img src="../assets/blog/2024-11-pixel.jpg" style="width:200px; float:right; clear:both; margin-left:.5em; margin-bottom:.2em;" alt="pixel1-screenshot" />

> The [source code of the pixel app](https://codeberg.org/webxdc/pixel/src/branch/main/script.js) 
> 
> - consists of 241 lines of Javascript (including all dependencies),
> 
> - offers collaborative realtime pixel-drawing 
> 
> - BUT does not require users to be online at the same time. 
> 
> The pixel app achieves its hybrid offline-first and realtime connectivity 
> by using two separate webxdc messaging APIs:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The [Pixel app](https://codeberg.org/webxdc/pixel/):

- consists of 241 lines of Javascript code(including all dependencies),

- offers collaborative real-time pixel-drawing 

- but does **not** require users to be online at the same time. 

The pixel app achieves its hybrid offline-first and real-time connectivity 
by using two separate webxdc messaging APIs:
```

[webxdc.joinRealtimeChannel() API](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html)
will Delta Chat initiate participation of your device in a P2P network. 
Delta Chat will send an end-to-end encrypted "system" chat message to a group chat
that contains an [Iroh Ticket](https://www.iroh.computer/docs/concepts/tickets). 
When receiving devices also join the realtime channel, 
they can establish a direct connection immediately because the ticket is already on record. 
No lookup in a global [distributed hash table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_hash_table)
slows down or complicates the initial connection. 
The federated e-mail system is used to bootstrap an ephemeral Peer-to-Peer network. 

<a href="https://github.com/deltachat/deltachat-core-rust">
<img src="../assets/blog/rust-delta.png" width="270" style="float:right; margin-left:1em;" />
</a>
To establish a direct P2P connection, 
two interested devices will use an ephemeral [Iroh Relay](https://www.iroh.computer/docs/protocols/net#relays) 
which typically runs on every chatmail server, 
mirroring the existing e-mail federation. 
If your chat profile is using a classic e-mail server

> then a global default relay is used, operated from the Iroh team. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
then a global default relay is used, operated kindly by the Iroh team. 
```

<img src="../assets/blog/2024-11-realtimecheck.png" width="150" style="float:right; margin-left:1em;" />
</a>

Only if you start an app that uses the 
[webxdc.joinRealtimeChannel() API](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html)
will Delta Chat initiate participation of your device in a P2P network. 
Delta Chat will send an end-to-end encrypted "system" chat message to a group chat
that contains an [Iroh Ticket](https://www.iroh.computer/docs/concepts/tickets). 
When receiving devices also join the realtime channel, 
they can establish a direct connection immediately because the ticket is already on record. 
No lookup in a global [distributed hash table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_hash_table)
slows down or complicates the initial connection. 
The federated e-mail system is used to bootstrap an ephemeral Peer-to-Peer network. 

You may download the [Realtime Check app](https://apps.testrun.org/webxdc-realtime-check-v1.0.5.xdc)
and share it into a chat to perform network latency analysis between realtime messaging peers. 
You can already run it in "Saved Messages" between two devices in a multi-device setup. 

To establish a direct P2P connection, 

> two interested devices will use an ephemeral [Iroh Relay](https://www.iroh.computer/docs/protocols/net#relays) 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
two interested devices will use an [Iroh Relay](https://www.iroh.computer/docs/protocols/net#relays) 
```
The relay server is not ephemeral, which is I think what this sentence was saying the way it is written.  I don't think there's a need to emphasise ephemeral here.

which typically runs on every chatmail server, 
mirroring the existing e-mail federation. 
If your chat profile is using a classic e-mail server
then a global default relay is used, operated from the Iroh team. 

The Iroh relay server combines both [Stun](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/STUN)
and [TURN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Traversal_Using_Relays_around_NAT) functionality,

> to allow peers to discover and directly connect and to 
> facilitate relaying of messages as long as no direct connection is established. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
to allow peers to discover and directly connect. Additionally it 
relays messages as long as no direct connection is established. 
```

For more details please check our 
[Rust deltachat::peer_channels docs](https://rs.delta.chat/deltachat/peer_channels/index.html). 

### Identity on the P2P network is ephemeral only 

<img src="../assets/blog/two-faces.jpg" width="140" style="float:right; margin-left:1em;" />
Delta Chat uses ephemeral cryptographic identities for any P2P messaging. 
When Delta Chat is closed or stopped by the operating system,
then a new identity will be created on the next start. 
All previous decryption keys will be forgotten
which provides a variant of so called [Forward Secrecy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forward_secrecy) because a network traffic collector and attacker 
can not later compromise your device to decrypt past recorded traffic. 

> Just start a LiveChat in a chat group :) 

Reviewer 5: This section is not necessarily wrong, but reads a little odd to me.

QUIC does use forward secrecy as it has key rotation built in.  Quinn and iroh use this.

Rotating the identity is also useful, but more for privacy reasons I think.

The way this is written now it seems to imply that the network connection itself has no forward secrecy, which isn't entirely correct.

### A privacy note on IP-addresses

Delta Chat does not store IP-addresses permanently anywhere 
and it does not expose IP addresses in the user interface or to web apps. 
Iroh relay servers do not see all the IP addresses 
that user devices advertise to each other (for example they don't see the WLAN addresses),
and they also do not store any IP addresses involved in facilitating a P2P connection. 

However, your chat partners may learn about your IP address if they deploy
some network monitoring tool or use a modified version of Delta Chat. 
If using webxdc apps with a potentially hostile chat partner is a concern for you 
you may disable the "webxdc realtime" setting in "advanced settings". 
Delta Chat will then never attempt any Peer-to-Peer connection with anyone. 
This is similar to how you can opt into "protect your IP address" in Signal or Whatsapp

> which by default establish Peer-to-Peer connections for calls between users, as well. 

Reviewer 6: signal only does p2p if some requirements are met, like the chat partners having each other saved as contact. Otherwise it defaults to relay, which is similar but not quite to DC, because DC disables the entire realitime feature instead of also using only relay.

Not sure if this fact is important enough to change anything, because the term is already "similar".
Removing "as well" might be an improvement as it reinforces the comparison/similarity.

to allow peers to discover and directly connect and to 
facilitate relaying of messages as long as no direct connection is established. 
For more details please check our 
[Rust deltachat::peer_channels docs](https://rs.delta.chat/deltachat/peer_channels/index.html). 

### Identity on the P2P network is ephemeral, and encryption is forward-secret 

<img src="../assets/blog/two-faces.jpg" width="140" style="float:right; margin-left:1em;" />

Delta Chat uses ephemeral cryptographic identities for any P2P messaging. 
When Delta Chat is closed or stopped by the operating system,
then a new ephemeral identity will be created on the next start. 
Moreover, Iroh uses [QUIC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QUIC) on the networking layer 
which implements [Forward Secrecy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forward_secrecy) 
so that a network traffic collector 
can not later compromise your device to decrypt past recorded traffic. 
Not only the Live Chat app but all realtime webxdc apps benefit 
from the ephemeral, end-to-end-encrypted and forward-secret P2P messaging
provided by the Iroh stack and its Delta Chat integration on all platforms. 

### A privacy note on IP-addresses

> Delta Chat does not store IP-addresses permanently anywhere 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Delta Chat does not store IP-addresses anywhere 
```

We process, but do not store them.

...IP addresses might be stored by other parties of course, depending on the involved mail servers... it's fine to omit this here I think.

they are not required to use Iroh but can instead 
use other existing XMPP ephemeral messaging capabilities. 

The [webxdc.joinRealtimeChannel() API](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html)
is a minimal high-level API 
that is easier to use than the [classic WebRTC Browser P2P API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RTCPeerConnection)
because a [webxdc messenger implementor](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/messenger.html)
carries the burden to manage all dynamic connectivity, discovery and network routing aspects. 

In fact Delta Chat apps themselves 
could evolve to use a different implementation for webxdc realtime communications. 
We've noted in the Fediverse lately that [Protocols and specifications provide freedom of exit](https://chaos.social/@delta/113492052382161817) 
and the new realtime API specification is a practical example for that. 

## Thanks to NLNET and NGI for their support and joint vision!

<img alt="NLNet Logo" src="../assets/logos/logo_nlnet.svg" width="140" style="float:right; margin-left:1em;" />  
Our introduction of the webxdc realtime API has been 

> supported by [NLnet](https://nlnet.nl/)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
supported by [NLnet](https://nlnet.nl/),
```
